The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is social science fiction and satire. Almost any
science fiction book concerning the future will suggest a future society. A
novel on space exploration will imply technology and social motivation behind
the exploration. Robot stories usually describe society's reaction to humanoid
machines. But there are a rather large class of novels and stories that deal
primarily with societies of the future. Narratives in which the focus is on the
structure of future societies, the societal attitudes, religion, mores, personal
lifestyles, and the politics of an extrapolated future. Sometimes these books
are critical in their speculations about where mankind and his social
institutions are heading. Sometimes they are outright depressing and
pessimistic. At other times they treat the subject with humor or satire, either
of a gentle or biting nature. It is in this area especially that one can
perceive the unique values of science fiction, since novels of the future allow
for serious speculation on both the immediate and far-reaching destiny of man.
Some of the greatest science fiction novels of all time belong to that category
of social science fiction. And that type of imaginative fiction, with a strong
social comment, has an awfully long tradition behind it. I think you can take it
back at least to Plato's Republic, back in classical days. Then Sir Thomas More,
in the Renaissance, of course, had his famous utopia, which dealt with the
future society. Francis Bacon wrote The New Atlantis in the early 17th century.
And at the end of the 19th, Samuel Butler published Erewhon, and Ralph Bellamy
published Looking Backward, both in regard to future societies. But the master,
H.G. Wells, many of his books dealt with societies of the future. The Time
Machine of 1895 described a future society very pessimistically. When the
Sleeper Wakes, almost at the turn of the century, did the same thing. Wells
also, in his War of the Worlds, described what it might be like if England, or
Great Britain, the great colonizer of their time, was invaded by a technology
vastly superior to theirs, as England was invading Africa at that time. That
could be considered sort of a satire. I think probably his deepest treatment of
a future society, that would be Men Like Gods, published in 1922. That's a
little later than most of his other books. And in it, he dealt with
overpopulation, the misuse of science. He described a world teetering almost
chaotically on ruin. And his solution to it was birth control and the
elimination of the unfit, in order to get society, to get it moving again. But
probably the two classics, two classic novels of this century, which describe
future societies and set the tone for almost all of the other treatments of
them, would be Huxley's Brave New World in 1932 and Orwell's 1984, published
about halfway through the century. These two novels show us two different styles
or approaches to the social commentary. In Huxley's Brave New World, we see a
dystopia caused by technology, the genetic engineering that is involved, as
opposed to Orwell, where here we have a system that is politically repressed. It
is not necessarily the technology that's caused this. It's a political thing.
Yes, in Huxley's Brave New World, he used a sort of class society which divided
people up into various levels. The alphas were the elite of the system. They
were the makers of the government. And then it went on down to betas and gammas
and epsilons and deltas. And each one had various functions that they carried
out. The alphas and betas and gammas and so on were brought about through
genetic engineering. They were individually engineered so that they would have
special abilities, some having higher levels of thought and some having greater
levels of manual dexterity. The others set up for heavy labor and lifting and
stuff like that. Of course, that class system, that regimentation you mentioned,
comes about because of the science, the technology, which the people have no
choice. In other words, they're engineered to be what particular class they're
in. But in Orwell, that kind of regimentation is due to politics rather than
science or technology. Orwell was caught between two authoritarian dictators, I
guess you'd say. Hitler was right behind him when he was writing his book and
Stalin was right in front of him. So it was almost natural that he would deal
with politics in his dystopian society. Several of the catchwords from the book
have remained faithful throughout the years, although the original reasons
behind them, that being them slanted towards Stalin and his secret police,
people still use the term "Big Brother" when they talk about, oh, the IRS, some of
the government agencies like the CIA. Any political entity that seems to repress
the people is referred to as Big Brother. It's become a phrase unto itself, even
away from the book. Of course, many of the things that Orwell showed the
government using, communication, spy devices, and so forth, we still have them
today. He was extrapolating from the knowledge and the science of his day, and
of course those extrapolations have come true. Another thing he used in the
novel was a term called Newspeak, which was really a new language where
specific terms and references to what the government didn't like, such as anti
-government activities, were deleted from the language. There were no words to
define those particular types of anti-government idioms. One of the party's
prime sayings was, who controls the past controls the present, and who controls
the present controls the future. And the society was strictly controlled.
Everybody was watched all the time, and that means all the time when you're at
home, in your house, where you're outside. You're always being monitored by some
sort of sophisticated telecommunications devices. I believe we'd have to say,
too, that that's one of the more pessimistic, futuristic, futurian or dystopian
novels, and that the ending doesn't really, is not really upbeat or not very
hopeful. The protagonist in the novel thinks he's broken away at least somewhat
from the society, but he is found out and brought into the Ministry of Love,
which is really the police, and they interrogate him and eventually put him
through some severe behavioral modification techniques, and he is brought about
to once more being an integral part of society, thinking Big Brother is good for
him, thinking the party is watching out for him, and once more becomes a
complacent cog in the wheel. The point is perhaps an examination of whether or
not society can be controlled to the point where people will forget that they're
human and will forget their drives of going on and progressing, and whether they
can be satiated with all of their needs met by the society itself.
I think we might also divide our discussion into two areas here. Now, all of
these novels, of course, deal with the future. But some of them are more aimed
at simply commenting on future societies, whether they think they're going to be
good ones or not, whereas others are actively satiric, in which they make fun or
criticize certain aspects of today's society. But I think one of the better
-known novels, which is, I think, mostly one of social comment, pessimistic
though it is, is Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451, which, when you look at the date of
publication, 1953, is surprisingly enough only four years later than Orwell's
1984. But I think it does stem from Huxley. Fahrenheit 451 does. In that, it's
the technology which is dominant. Our electronic media-oriented society has done
away with books, and the people are subject to electronics. They are a rather
complacent populace. They sit around and watch television all the time, and the
television is huge. It covers the entire wall. In fact, it can cover three walls
in a person's house. If they provide for the society or for the state to their
best ability, they may actually get a fourth screen and have a room that
completely surrounds them with television. Bradbury does have, I think, some
ingenious things in the novel. For instance, the fireman, one of the, well, the
main character is a fireman. Their job is to start fires rather than put them
out. And the fires they start, of course, are book-burning fires. Anybody who's
caught with a book is guilty of a social sin. And it's near the end of the book
that the protagonist, who's escaped his fireman's job and is trying to get away
from the hound, the electrical hound, which is chasing him, and he runs across
from misfits, some bums or some hobos down by the river. And each one of them is
a book. He has totally memorized one of the classics from the past and knows it
word by word, line by line, so that even though they no longer own books or have
access to them, they still remember the great ideas from the past simply because
they've memorized them and try to keep themselves intact and safe so that they
can retain this knowledge. In essence, his novel starts out as a dystopia, but
ends up having a sort of glimmer of hope at the end of it, at least that these
ideas from the past, these great works will not perish, but will be kept alive,
handed down to the agents by word of mouth. This last aspect of the book was
treated very well, I think, in the 1966 film of this book made by Francois
Truffaut. The scene of the book learners at the end is one of the more marvelous
things in that film. The mood is just right with each person spouting off part
of the book that he knows, memorizing it and remembering it, and the old man
teaching his knowledge to the young man so that that will be passed on from
generation to generation. You know, it's remarkable how many movies of a science
fiction nature have this type of social comment as their purpose. It's almost as
if Hollywood has taken its special province, the kind of science fiction novel
or story which would describe a future society, and there have been many of
them, you know, going all the way back into the early days of moviemaking, as
far back as, oh, the 20s, the 30s, things to come. In that particular film, in
the story it was adapted from, which was called Shape of Things to Come, Wells
speculates on what the future might be after an upcoming war, which he
visualizes in that. The future is fairly bleak, at least in Great Britain, until
the airmen come over from the Mediterranean and help them set up a new
civilization, and through technology, they eventually rebuild the Earth. It's
fairly optimistic. We also might mention the movie THX 1138 by George Lucas.
This was prior to the time when Lucas wrote and produced American Graffiti and
then followed it by Star Wars. This particular movie was about a dystopian
future where everybody lived underground in an extremely regimented society
where sex was forbidden. People were kept in control by use of drugs. Whenever
they began to feel good or feel bad, they simply went to the medicine cabinet in
the bathroom, opened it up, and told the medicine cabinet how they felt, and it
would dispense drugs to take care of how they felt. It would make them feel back
in a complacent, compliant mood that was condoned by the government. Soylent
Green came out in 1973. That was from a novel by Harry Harrison entitled Make
Room! Make Room! And it's one of the classic overpopulation novels. In this
case, it's food that they're running out of. And the population is fed by sort
of biscuits or crackers of different colors. And the protagonist, played by
Charlton Heston in the movie,
investigates and by the end of the movie finds out a horrible fact that the
crackers or the biscuits that people are now eating, called Soylent Green, are
made from disposed of bodies, human bodies. And the movie ends on that rather
grisly note. We better mention just a few other significant novels of social
comment before we get on to satire. John Brunner, in 1976 published The Shockwave
Rider, and I think that should be mentioned. Brunner's been called a master of
sociological extrapolation. He's a writer on society. That's his thing. And in
that book, he pictures a 21st century America which is totally based on
computers and data processing. This is a technology that has shaped society. And
you have a plug-in society which has developed. The computer is everywhere.
People plug into it, get their directions, tell the government what they're
doing and so forth. And the hero named Nick learns how to alter the computer's
databanks, which reveals a government manipulation of people and so forth. At
the end of the book, you get the impression that maybe something is going to be
done about it. This kind of repressive computer society might be overthrown. A
similar concept was brought forth in Ira Levin's This Perfect Day, written in
1970. And as usual, as you might expect, Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle get into
the act. They cover almost every category of science fiction you could think of.
Their 1976 novel, Inferno, I think would have to be considered an important
novel of social comment. What they did was rewrite Dante's Inferno in science
fiction terms and explore different facets of human psychology. I'd like to
mention also one other novel that would fit in this category. A very optimistic
novel called Emphyrio by Jack Vance. It's set on another planet, but it is a
human society. This is far in the future when humans have expanded into space
onto many planets. We have a society here that is repressed by a system of lords
and ladies who live away from the common people. And the people are known for
their handcrafted work. And they are kept doing this handcrafted work. They're
repressed in the way that they cannot produce anything that's duplicated, not
even printing. One of our people on the planet, the protagonist, breaks away
from the society because he feels like their life is really meaningless. It's
just the same old thing every day, in and out. He breaks away from the society
and then eventually shows them the error of it and changes the society for
better. Another way that an author might comment on society or some of the
problems that he sees in society is by using satire, where he can poke fun with
humor at what's happening in society, or he can bitterly criticize what's going
on in society. I think the classic here would be The Space Merchants. It was
originally published as a novelette called the Gravy Planet, and I think it was
1952 edition of Galaxy. Cyril Kornbluth and Frederik Pohl, of course,
collaborated on it. But probably in terms of pure satire and also pure
extrapolation from the present, this novel, I think, would be above most others.
It's a totally advertising society. Consider how much time, effort, influence
that advertising has in our society today. Some people think, you know, The
Hidden Persuader, for instance, by Vance Packard, was a study that illustrated
the importance of advertising. And what Kornbluth and Pohl have done is to set
up a society where the total society, from the government on down, is based on
advertising. The heroes of the society are so-called copysmiths, people who are
master advertisers, masters at molding the minds of the people. One of the
phrases in advertising, cutthroat competition, is brought into a grim reality
here in that if one of your competitors in advertising comes up with an idea
that you want, you can literally declare war on him and physically go out and
attack his corporation and win from him that specific contract. The world in
which this particular novel takes place is overpopulated and the resources have
been drained. And the protagonist is the head of a project which will take a lot
of the populace off to Venus to mine for specific minerals and metals to
refurbish the resources on Earth. And what they have to do is convince the
populace that it's a good thing to go to Venus because it's a wonderful place.
Whereas in actuality, they know that Venus is a horrible place and they're going
to have to live in domed underground cities and whatnot. But that turns out to
be the solution to the novel because the basic conflict is between the leaders
of this advertising society and a group of conservationists called the Consies.
And the Consies feel that man has to get off the Earth. His whole value system
has to change and he has to get off the Earth to do that. So they sort of help
and use the protagonist at the same time, the one involved with the Venus
Project, they help him so that this campaign is successful and their people, the
conservationists, are the ones who go to Venus. And I think we're supposed to
believe they will start a new vital society on that planet. One of the things
that helps the protagonist make up his mind about the Venus Project and what
he's going to do with it is he's kidnapped in Antarctica and his death is faked
and he's sent off to some synthetic yeast farms in Costa Rica as a lowly
consumer. And he gets to see life as a consumer, whereas before he's been a high
executive and he's had special privileges that went along with that rank. And
once he sees society from the other side, he believes there are certain things
that he wants to do about it in order to change society. The style of the novel,
I think, should be called a prospective reader's attention, too. It's very
cleverly done. There are many puns. There are many restatements of present
little sayings or advertising cliches and so forth, which are extrapolated and
changed a little bit for this novel. And it causes a great deal of humor. And I
think that kind of humor and that kind of biting criticism that the authors put
into the book definitely qualified as a work of satire. Not just simple social
comment, but they are satirizing our present-day society and the importance we
give to business and advertising. Another novel which satirizes advertising is
The Big Ball of Wax by Shepherd Mead, written in 1954. It does to television what
space merchants does to advertising in general. It extrapolates on what
television might become, at least from the viewpoint of a person who was living
in the 50s. It shows how it dominates his life through advertising and courses
him into buying products, which he might generally, if he had time to think
about it, he wouldn't buy. And it dehumanizes the news by using dolls to reenact
various natural disasters and crimes, whereby people don't actually see human
suffering. All they see are these little dolls reenacting the specific
tragedies. Both those books, I think, concentrate on specific facets of our
present-day society, for instance, advertising or television. But there's
another writer, Stanislaw Lem, whose satire is really aimed at almost the whole
human race. He'll pick almost everything possible and satirize it sooner or
later in some of his works. This satire is of the very, very humorous variety.
It's just a joy to read, and there's all sorts of different escapades that he
gets his stories into and out of. One novel we might mention in particular is
The Cyberiad. The concept of the novel is that far in the future, humankind has
degenerated, and the robots that they built ages and ages ago have become a
civilization unto themselves. There are two main characters. Both, of course,
are robots, Trurl and Klappalcius. They are constructors. Their design is to
build things. There are all sorts of different kinds of robots, but their main
purpose is to build other things, other machines. They get into all sorts of
escapades, and usually they're a little bit vying with each other to come up
with something a little bit better than the other one did. One episode that
might illustrate the idea of satirizing society is a very short one called
"Trurl's Prescription", and he postulates out in remote space a small planet with
small creatures called the Steelypips, and they live in a very mechanized
society, very happy society, until a great comet comes by one day and deposits
something, they don't know what it is, onto their planet. But this something,
whatever it is, according to the book, flies up, lands on the highest peak, and
makes itself comfortable and doesn't budge, but it's an awful nuisance all the
same. Well, the Steelypips call in Trurl, one of the constructors, to see if he
can get rid of it for them, because they've tried everything, and they want to
know if they can bring him some TNT or dynamite or radiation or whatever he
needs. And Trurl says, no, you just need paper, ink, stamps, and seals, sealing
wax and thumbtacks and blotters and a teller window and zinc teaspoon, coffee
and a mailman. And he proceeds to set up an office and starts sending the
creature, whatever it is, summonses and notices, and you will have to vacate by
a certain time if you don't sign these particular forms and so forth. Finally,
the creature, which has condescended to reply to the notices, is ordered to
vacate and has to do so because he's playing along with the system that Trurl
set up. At the very end of the story, Trurl explains how this worked to the
Steelypips, who are quite confounded, they don't understand. He says,
basically, my dears, the whole thing was quite simple. The moment it accepted
the first dispatch and signed for it, it was done for. I employed a special
machine, the machine with a big B. For as the cosmos is this cosmos, no one's
licked it yet. The B, of course, stands for bureaucracy.
Yeah, the stories in the Siberiad, as you say, they belong to almost like a
novel with these two characters doing their thing. But they're almost set up
like separate little fables. And in some of them, his satire is aimed at much
larger things in society. He gets his two characters involved in another
adventure near the end of the Cyberiad. And they discover a civilization which
has reached the highest possible level of development. They call it an HPLD
civilization. And they want to learn from these people. Why? What's it like to
be in the highest possibly developed state? And these creatures don't want to
respond. They're simply stagnant. But finally, they do respond because of
certain machinations and certain overtures that the two robots make. And they
give the two robots a compound called altruizine. And they say altruizine, if
you put it in the water supply of any planet, any city, whatever, will make
everyone feel the same way as everybody else does. And this should bring about
universal brotherhood. In other words, you can feel exactly what your neighbor,
your friend, your relative, whatever is feeling. And this should, you know,
cause all violence to stop. Because if you feel something like they do, you'll
understand them better. But I think Stanislaw Lem can be somewhat cynical
sometimes. And I think this is one instance of it. The two robots do put this
substance into the water supply of a planet. And it causes immediate chaos.
Everybody feels the pain of everybody else. And they suffer. And they try to do
away with the other people so that their suffering will stop. And the whole
place just is turned upside down because of humanitarian motives of these two
robots. One of the more interesting satirists of our time is Kurt Vonnegut.
There's an interesting story behind Vonnegut's work. He's always tried to avoid
the label of being a science fiction writer. He realized that science fiction
authors are not as highly considered by critics and teachers and scholars and so
forth as mainstream writers. So he's always tried to avoid that label. But I
would say 75% of his work would have to be classified as science fiction. He's
written about time travel, for instance, in Slaughterhouse-Five. He's written
about robots and space travel and The Sirens of Titan. Player Piano is
considered a classic dystopia of an automated world. Cat's Cradle is a
cataclysmic novel with definite science fiction overtones in it. And back in the
50s and early 60s, he published stories in science fiction magazines like
Galaxy, Fantasy and Science Fiction, If, Wonder Stories, and so forth. And he's
one of the rare writers, I think, who's noticed by critics and readers beyond
the circle of science fiction people. And one of his classic satiric stories
would be one published in 1961 in Galaxy entitled Harrison Bergeron. In Harrison
Bergeron, you see a society where it is mandatory that you be equal to everybody
else. If you are an athlete, you're required to wear weights in order to slow
you down so you can't move faster than anybody else. If you are exceptionally
beautiful, you're required to wear a mask so you won't appear prettier than
anybody else. In fact, the government is in charge of enforcing these rules.
There's even a United States handicapper general who makes all of the judgments
as to whom should wear what kind of a mask and to what degree. And same thing
for belts and other devices. There are also devices that fit in the ear that are
loudspeakers that will inject very weird sounds or sound effects or crashes or
noises to distract an agile mind from being able to think straight. Meaning that
they would be smarter or quicker mentally than someone else. That they even
enforce that kind of mental mediocrity. And Harrison Bergeron is almost the
antithesis of what the society believes in. And he's huge. He's seven feet tall.
He's beautiful. You know, has the body of a Greek god. He's also a genius. And
he manages to escape all the traps and all the restrictions that the society has
imposed on people. And escapes and meets a beautiful ballerina who's been
dancing, of course, with lead weights on her body. And they immediately fall in
love, this perfect pair, all beautiful, all intelligent, and so forth. And they
start to rise dancing in their beautiful dance of love. And also, they're on
television at the time that this is going on. And everybody is watching this
beautiful happening. And one of the people comes in from the handicappers, the
government handicappers, and shoots them with a shotgun and kills them both. And
they both fall to the floor dead. And then the scene shifts back to Harrison
Bergeron's parents who are watching this program. And his father reenters the
room. He's gone out to get a sandwich while all this beautiful stuff was going
on. And when he comes back in, his wife has a few tears on her face. And he
says, well, what happened? He says, well, something beautiful happened on the
television, but I can't really remember what it was. And he says, well, that's
the way it ought to be. And then things just keep going on. In conclusion, we
might say that it's clear that novels of social comment are among the more
thoughtful of science fiction books. Usually, the author is seriously concerned
with mankind's future. And is not merely creating a pure adventure story to
excite the readers like in Star Wars. It is in this category of satire and
social comment that science fiction has contributed most significantly to
mainstream fiction.
This is David Crews. Daryl Lane. And David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show. A presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association. In conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.